feat: replication protocol (#136)
storacha/specs: w3-replication.md

> # Replication Protocol

Reviewer: I propose we settle on names to differentiate the "node with the data" and the "node replicating the data". Might be worth explicitly defining this in the introduction, or language section?

Primary Node - The node that originally received and stored the initial blob upload
Replica Node - Any node that receives a copy of the blob during the replication process

![draft](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-draft-yellow.svg?style=flat-square)

## Authors

- [Alan Shaw](https://github.com/alanshaw), [Storacha Network](https://storacha.network/)

## Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119).

## Introduction

> Replication ensures that if a storage node loses a blob, it remains available in the network. This specification is an extension to the blob protocol that allows nodes within the network to replicate data between each other _after_ a storage node has received an initial upload.

Reviewer: preventing data loss is an outcome of operating this protocol, as is distribution, load balancing, etc.

## Specification

### Diagram

The interactions can be summarized by the following diagram:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Client
    participant UploadService
    participant ReplicaNode
    participant PrimaryNode

    Note over Client,UploadService: Step 1: Instruct replication
    Client->>UploadService: space/blob/replicate (with location to fetch data)

    Note over UploadService,ReplicaNode: Step 2: Allocate replication
    UploadService->>ReplicaNode: blob/replica/allocate (with location to fetch data)
    ReplicaNode->>UploadService: blob/replica/allocate receipt (indicates capacity reserved)
    UploadService->>Client: space/blob/replicate receipt

    Note over ReplicaNode,PrimaryNode: Step 3: Replica node “pulls” data from original
    ReplicaNode->>PrimaryNode: Fetch content from "location" commitment
    PrimaryNode->>ReplicaNode: Returns blob data

    Note over Client,ReplicaNode: Step 4: Confirm transfer to replicate
    ReplicaNode->>UploadService: blob/replica/transfer receipt (indicates success/failure)
    UploadService->>Client: blob/replica/transfer receipt
```

### Blob Replicate

> A `space/blob/replicate` invocation instructs the upload service to replicate a blob to the specified number of storage nodes. A replication request is only valid to be issued _after_ the client has received a `blob/accept` receipt, indicating the target storage node has successfully received the blob.

Author: Any agent with authority to issue `space/blob/replicate` for a blob in the space. The "client" typically.

The caveats for `space/blob/replicate` MUST include a `replicas` parameter, an unsigned integer indicating the number of copies the network should ensure are stored _in addition_ to the original.

> It is RECOMMENDED that the upload service mandate a minimum _and_ a maximum value. The minimum and maximum MAY be the same.

Author: Hmm, this is not saying that the service will try to organise a mininum and maximum number of replicas, just that the `replicas` field should have a minimum and maximum value.

Implicitly the minimum is 1 replica (if you're going to ask for replication you must ask for at least 1 replica) but the service might have an SLA it wishes to uphold that requires at least 3 replicas _minimum_ (for example). A service may set a maximum because, for example, it's cost prohibitive to store that many replicas, or there is not that many nodes that operate on the network.

e.g. `replicas: 2` will ensure 3 copies of the data exist in the network.

The blob to be replicated and the location where the blob may be found are also required.

```json5
{
  "iss": "did:key:zAlice",
  "aud": "did:web:upload.service.example.com",
  "att": [
    {
      "with": "did:key:zAliceSpace",
      "can": "space/blob/replicate",
      "nb": {
        /** The blob that MUST be replicated. */
        "blob": {
          "digest": { "/": { "bytes": "..." } },
          "size": 1234
        },
        /** Number of replicas to ensure. */
        "replicas": 2,
        /** A location commitment indicating where the blob MUST be fetched from. */
        "site": { "/": "bafy..locationCommitment" }
      }
    }
  ],
  "prf": [],
  "sig": "..."
}
```

> It is RECOMMENDED that the location commitment is included in the invocation.

Author: Gotcha, I will reword. The caveats MUST include the link to the location commitment. The _invocation_ is RECOMMENDED to include the block(s) that comprise the location commitment (the actual data). It suggests that the location commitment is either cached or available via IPFS \*waves hands\*.

Our service has no resolution so will fail if the location commitment is not included.

The receipt for `space/blob/replicate` includes effects (async tasks) for `blob/replica/transfer`. Successful completion of the `blob/replica/transfer` task indicates the replication target has transferred and stored the blob. The number of `blob/replica/transfer` tasks corresponds directly to number of replicas requested.

> Each replication task MUST target a _different_ storage node and they MUST NOT target the original upload target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each replication task MUST target a _different_ replica node and they MUST NOT target the primary node.
``

> The upload service MUST select storage node(s) and allocate replication space when the `space/blob/replicate` invocation is received.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upload service MUST select replica node(s) and allocate replication space when the `space/blob/replicate` invocation is received.
```

##### Site

The `nb.site` field MUST be a [Link] to the [location commitment] describing where the blob can be retrieved.

#### Blob Replicate Receipt Schema

```ts
type ReplicateBlobReceipt = {
  ran:  Link<ReplicateBlob>
  out: Result<ReplicateBlobOk, ReplicateBlobError>
  fx: {
    fork: [
      Link<AllocateReplicaBlob>
      Link<TransferReplicaBlob>
    ]
  }
}

type Result<Ok, Err> = { ok: Ok } | { error: Err }

type ReplicateBlobOk = {
  site: [{
    "ucan/await": [".out.ok.site", Link<TransferReplicaBlob>]
  }]
}

type ReplicateBlobError = {
  message: string
}
```

##### Blob Replicate Result

Invocation MUST fail if any of the following is true:

1. Provided subject space is not provisioned with a provider.
1. Provided subject space does not currently store the blob.
1. Provided `blob.size` is outside of supported range.
1. Provided `blob.digest` is not a valid [multihash].
1. Provided `blob.digest` [multihash] hashing algorithm is not supported.
1. Provided `replicas` is not an unsigned integer greater than 0.

> 1. Provided `site` is a valid, non-revoked [location commitment].

Reviewer: seems like success?

> Invocation MUST succeed if non of the above is true. Success value MUST be an object with a `site` field set to an array of [ucan/await] of the task that produces a [location commitment], one for each replica requested.

Author: 🤦‍♂️ copy pasta error it's in other files also...

Task linked from the `site` of the success value MUST be present in the receipt effects _(`fx` field)_.

##### Blob Replicate Effects

Successful invocation MUST start a workflow consisting of following tasks, that MUST be set in receipt effects (`fx` field) in the following order:

1. [Blob Replica Allocate](#blob-replica-allocate) (1 or more)
1. [Blob Replica Transfer](#blob-replica-transfer) (1 or more)

The number of effects received is dependent on the number of replicas requested.

### Blob Replica Allocate

> The upload service allocates replication space on storage nodes by issuing a `blob/replica/allocate` invocation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upload service allocates replication space on replica nodes by issuing a `blob/replica/allocate` invocation:
```

```json5
{
  "iss": "did:web:upload.service.example.com",
  "aud": "did:key:zStorageNode",
  "att": [
    {
      "with": "did:key:zStorageNode",
      "can": "blob/replica/allocate",
      "nb": {
        /** The blob that was must be replicated. */
        "blob": {
          "digest": { "/": { "bytes": "..." } },
          "size": 1234
        },
        /** DID of the space the blob has been allocated to. */
        "space": { "/": { "bytes": "..." } },
        /** A location commitment indicating where the blob MUST be fetched from. */
        "site": { "/": "bafy..locationCommitment" },
        /** The `space/blob/replicate` invocation that caused this allocation. */
        "cause": { "/": "bafy..replicate" }
      }
    }
  ],
  "prf": [],
  "sig": "..."
}
```

> The `blob/replica/allocate` task receipt includes an async task that will be performed by the storage node: `blob/replica/transfer`. The `blob/replica/transfer` task is completed when the storage node has transferred the blob from its location to the storage node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `blob/replica/allocate` task receipt includes an async task that will be performed by the replica node: `blob/replica/transfer`. The `blob/replica/transfer` task is completed when the replica node has transferred the blob from its location on the primary node.
```

    cause: Link<ReplicateBlob>
  }
}
```

##### Blob

The `nb.blob` field MUST be set to the `Blob` the space is allocated for.

##### Space

The `nb.space` field MUST be set to the (byte encoded) [DID] of the user space where allocation took place.

##### Location

The `nb.site` field MUST be a [Link] to the [location commitment] describing where the blob can be retrieved.

##### Cause

The `nb.cause` field MUST be set to the [Link] for the [Replicate Blob](#blob-replicate) task, that caused an allocation.

#### Blob Replica Allocate Receipt Schema

```ts
type AllocateReplicaBlobReceipt = {
  ran:  Link<AllocateReplicaBlob>
  out:  Result<AllocateReplicaBlobOk, AllocateReplicaBlobError>
  fx: {
    fork: [Link<TransferReplicaBlob>]
  }
}

type AllocateReplicaBlobOk = {
  /** The number of bytes allocated for a Blob. */
  size: int
}

type AllocateReplicaBlobError = {
  message: string
}
```

##### Blob Replica Allocate Result

Invocation MUST fail if any of the following is true:

1. Provided `blob.size` is outside of supported range.
1. Provided `blob.digest` is not a valid [multihash].
1. Provided `blob.digest` [multihash] hashing algorithm is not supported.

> 1. Provided `site` is a valid, non-revoked [location commitment].

Author: Gah, yes wrong way around

Invocation MUST succeed if non of the above is true.

###### Size

The `out.ok.size` MUST be set to the number of bytes that were allocated for the `Blob`. It MUST be equal to either:

1. The `nb.blob.size` of the invocation.

> 2. `0` if the storage node already has memory allocated for the `nb.blob`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. `0` if the replica node already has memory allocated for the `nb.blob`.
```

### Blob Replica Transfer

The `blob/replica/transfer` task is completed by each replication node. Replication data is fetched from the location specified in the location commitment referenced by the `blob/replica/allocate` invocation.

A `blob/replica/transfer` task takes the following form:

```json5
{
  "iss": "did:key:zStorageNode",
  "aud": "did:key:zStorageNode",
  "att": [
    {
      "with": "did:key:zStorageNode",
      "can": "blob/replica/transfer",
      "nb": {
        /** The blob that will be transferred. */
        "blob": {
          "digest": { "/": { "bytes": "..." } },
          "size": 1234
        },
        /** DID of the space the blob has been allocated to. */
        "space": { "/": { "bytes": "..." } },
        /** The location the blob will be transferred from. */
        "site": { "/": "bafy..locationCommitment" },
        /** The `blob/replica/allocate` invocation that initiated this transfer. */
        "cause": { "/": "bafy..allocate" }
      }
    }
  ],
  "prf": [],
  "sig": "..."
}
```

> When the `blob/replica/transfer` task is complete a receipt is issued. The receipt is communicated back to the upload service via a [`ucan/conclude` invocation](./w3-ucan.md#conclusion).

Reviewer: Is it worth discussing failure cases here for transfer? Or is it intended that the replica node performs the transfer task until a successful completion? Is it the responsibility of the upload service to identify failed transfers and re-schedule invocations to complete them?

> The receipt for `blob/replica/transfer` includes a new signed location commitment from the storage node the blob has been replicated to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The receipt for `blob/replica/transfer` includes a new signed location commitment from the replica node the blob has been replicated to.
```

  nb: {
    blob: Blob
    space: Bytes<SpaceDID>
    site: Link<LocationCommitment>
    cause: Link<AllocateReplicaBlob>
  }
}
```

##### Blob

The `nb.blob` field MUST be set to the `Blob` the space is allocated for.

##### Space

The `nb.space` field MUST be set to the (byte encoded) [DID] of the user space where allocation took place.

##### Site

The `nb.site` field MUST be a [Link] to the [location commitment] describing where the blob can be retrieved.

##### Cause

The `nb.cause` field MUST be set to the [Link] for the [Allocate Replica Blob](#blob-replica-allocate) task, that caused an allocation.

#### Blob Replica Transfer Receipt Schema

```ts
type TransferReplicaBlobReceipt = {
  ran: Link<TransferReplicaBlob>
  out: Result<TransferReplicaBlobOk, TransferReplicaBlobError>
}

type TransferReplicaBlobOk = {
  site: Link<LocationCommitment>
}

type TransferReplicaBlobError = {
  message: string
}
```

##### Blob Replica Transfer Result

Invocation MUST fail if any of the following is true:

1. Provided `blob.size` is outside of supported range.
1. Provided `blob.digest` is not a valid [multihash].
1. Provided `blob.digest` [multihash] hashing algorithm is not supported.

> 1. Provided `site` is a valid, non-revoked [location commitment].

Reviewer: seems like a success case?

# Replication Protocol

![draft](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-draft-yellow.svg?style=flat-square)

## Authors

- [Alan Shaw](https://github.com/alanshaw), [Storacha Network](https://storacha.network/)

## Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119).

## Introduction

> The Replication Protocol enables distributed storage of blobs across multiple nodes in the network. This specification extends the blob protocol by defining how nodes replicate data after initial upload. The protocol establishes four roles: **Client** instructs replications, **Replication Service** receives replication instructions and orchestrates replications, **Primary Nodes** receive initial uploads, and **Replica Nodes** store additional copies.

Reviewer: <3
